INSTALLING OPENINTERACT 2
=========================

(NOTE: If you're upgrading from version 1 or earlier, please read the
file 'UPGRADE' in this directory. The short news: there's no simple
conversion, but you'll be gaining lots of functionality.)


(1) Run the normal perl install

 perl Makefile.PL
 make
 make test (this may take a while...)
 make install

This procedure will install the base libraries. Normal Perl
installation rules apply.

OpenInteract2 uses a number of libraries, and all of them are readily
available via CPAN. For those on Win32 systems without a compiler,
most of them are also available via the PPM installation system. Some
modules requiring compilation are not available via PPM and are
available at:

 http://openinteract.sourceforge.net/

Instructions for setup and download are located there as well.

(2) Create a website

Without changing directories from the directory where you unpacked the
OpenInteract2 distribution, run:

 oi2_manage create_website --website_dir=/path/to/mysite \
                           --source_dir=.

You can also copy the 'sample/' and 'pkg/' directories to a separate,
accessible directory and create a website with:

 oi2_manage create_website --website_dir=/path/to/mysite \
                          --source_dir=/path/to/copied/dirs

The 'oi2_manage' script should have been installed to a publically
accessible place (e.g., '/usr/local/bin' or '/usr/bin') for you when
you installed the rest of the library with 'make install'. If not,
just copy the file 'script/oi2_manage' to an accessible place. (You
can also just run 'script/oi2_manage install', but then 'oi2_manage'
won't be accessible to manipulate future websites and configuration
information. This makes life hard for you. Why do that?)

That's it! Your website is created and future upgrades are just for
individual package upgrades.

(3) Read up

Check out the documentation: 

1. INSTALL.website (in your new website's root directory): Tells you
how to configure and start your new OpenInteract2 website. This
document is also copied to the website directory when you create it.

2. 'perldoc OpenInteract2::Manual' or, after finishing your website
installation, go to the '/SystemDoc/' path and read it through your
browser. In the manual you'll find information about administering
OpenInteract2, notes about packages, what goes into creating a
website, building/configuring Apache, how to create develop a package,
and much more.

Good luck, and have fun!

=========================
$Id: INSTALL,v 1.2 2003/04/18 02:40:08 lachoy Exp $
