=head1 NAME

OpenInteract2::Manual::SPOPS - Controlling interations between OpenInteract2 and SPOPS

=head1 SYNOPSIS

This part of the OpenInteract manual describes how OpenInteract2 uses
SPOPS and the additional features you can set.

=head1 SPOPS SUBCLASS NAMING

Unlike OI 1.x, you no longer have to name L<SPOPS::DBI|SPOPS::DBI>,
L<SPOPS::DBI::Pg|SPOPS::DBI::Pg>, or any other implementation-specific
subclass in the 'isa' key of your configuration. Instead, you just
need to tell OI2 what datasource you're using for the object -- if you
don't specify one then you're using the default, which is normally
'main'.

At startup time OI2 will rewrite the 'isa' key to have the proper
entries in it for your datasource. This means your objects will never
get out of sync and eliminates a major hassle with OI 1.x. Here's an
example. Say you have the following datasource declared in your server
configuration:

 [datasource main]
 type = DBI
 spops = SPOPS::DBI::Pg
 ...



=head1 SECURITY TAGGING

=head1 CREATION SECURITY CONVERSION

=head1 DISPLAY/EDIT URL

SPOPS allows you to specify a URL for display/editing in the
configuration key 'display'. OpenInteract2 enhances this by allowing
you to use the common 'ACTION' and 'TASK' keys and have the URL be
generated at runtime, including the deployment context. This allows
you to focus on the action and not worry about deployment details.

=head1 DATE CONVERSION

OpenInteract can perform round-trip date conversion for you. This
means that when a date is pulled out of the database it will be
converted into an object (normally L<DateTime|DateTime>) and when you
execute a C<save()> against an object it will be converted from the
object format into one your database can understand.

Setting it up is simple. Just set the key 'convert_date_field' in your
SPOPS configuration to an array reference with the fields in your
object of date/datetime format.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<DateTime|DateTime>

L<SPOPS::Tool::DateConvert|SPOPS::Tool::DateConvert>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2002-2003 Chris Winters. All rights reserved.

=head1 AUTHORS

Chris Winters E<lt>chris@cwinters.comE<gt>
